  REFERENCIAS CAPITULO VII (77 A 90)
  
  NOTA 77. Véase en http://www.cafc.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/opinions-orders/13-1021.Opinion.5-7-2014.1.PDF 

  NOTA 78. Véase en http://cafc.uscourts.gov/ 
  
  NOTA 79 Excepto para la función de rangeCheck que consistió en nueve líneas de código, y ocho archivos de seguridad descompilados. Respecto de rangeCheck la Corte de Distrito había dicho que un ingeniero de Sun Microsystems que había construido rangeCheck posteriormente trabajó en Google y contribuyó con dos archivos que contenían la función de rangeCheck –“Timsort.java” y “Comparable Timsort” en la Plataforma Android. En definitiva, las nueve líneas de la función de rangeCheck se copiaron directamente en Android. Con relación a los ocho archivos descompilados, la Corte de Distrito encontró que habían sido copiados y utilizados como archivos de testeo.

  NOTA 80. Véase en https://www.copyright.gov/title17/ En su texto original el articulo 102 expresa: “102. Subject matter of copyright: In general (a) Copyright protection subsists, in accordance with this title, in original works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression, now known or later developed, from which they can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device. Works of authorship include the following categories: (1) literary works; (2) musical works, including any accompanying words; (3) dramatic works, including any accompanying music; (4) pantomimes and choreographic works; (5) pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works; (6) motion pictures and other audiovisual works; (7) sound recordings; and (8) architectural works. (b) In no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship extend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery, regardless of the form in which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work. Por su parte el artículo 101 en sus definiciones, expresa cuando se considera que una obra se encuentra fijada en un medio tangible, y dice así: “A work is “fixed” in a tangible medium of expression when its embodiment in a copy or phonorecord, by or under the authority of the author, is sufficiently permanent or stable to permit it to be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a period of more than transitory duration. A work consisting of sounds, images, or both, that are being transmitted, is “fixed” for purposes of this title if a fixation of the work is being made simultaneously with its transmission.”
 
  NOTA 81. Véase el artículo 101 que textualmente expresa “A “computer program” is a set of statements or instructions to be used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a certain result” https://www.copyright.gov/title17/92chap1.html 

  NOTA 82. Johnson Controls Inc, v. Phoenix Control sys., Inc., 886 F.2 1173, 1175 (9th Cir. 1989)

  NOTA 83. Véase “As noted above, the Java Packages provide a set of pre-existing programs that allow developers to quickly and efficiently create their own applications in Java. But merely offering a programming platform in which developers could build cross-system applications would not have been enough to get developers to use it. Indeed, that functionality could have been made accessible in any number of ways (as discussed infra). To attract developers to invest the time to learn the platform, the selection and then naming and organization of the packages had to be easy to understand, memorize, and master. A package’s declaring code therefore must communicate what a program does, how it relates to other programs, and what is needed for it to work, in a way that is intuitive and resonates with programmers. For this reason, Sun invested an enormous amount of creativity in developing an original hierarchy of packages organized into a distinctive library and unique classes. This code and organization is integral to the program, the way a table of contents is intertwined with a book. Designing a package entailed numerous creative choices. Java’s architects had to decide what packages to create, and within those, how many classes and methods to include. Moreover, for every package, class, and method that made the cut, Java’s creators had to name each element and determine how to arrange them. Over time, Java’s developers evolved existing packages and added new ones. And the art of package design stretches beyond the level of individual packages. Because Java programmers benefit from familiarity with the Java Package library, and because many packages are interrelated, significant attention was paid to the totality of the library: the selection and arrangement of those packages must be just as appealing and elegant as each individual package. Making these thousands of choices was a massive creative task. Oracle I, C.A. 20,797–98. None was required for the programs to perform their function or dictated by the Java language. Pet. App. 165a–166a.  https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/18/18-956/133505/20200219153012820_Brief.pdf 
  
  NOTA 84. La teoría de la fusión sólo fue argumentada por la Corte de Distrito en relación al código declarado, y no respecto de su estructura secuencia y organización (SSO). De hecho, El Juez de Distrito reconoció que había cientos de formas de haber organizado los paquetes de la API de Java. Por ello reconoció que la SSO era original y que no había nada en las reglas del lenguaje de programación de Java que requiriese que Google hubiese replicado como lo hizo los mismos paquetes, clases y métodos. 
  
  NOTA 85. En este caso la Corte Suprema de Estados Unidos había concedido el certiorari, pero después de la etapa de los argumentos orales, SCOTUS anunció que estaba dividida en partes iguales. Por lo tanto, SCOTUS dejo vigente la decisión del Circuito Primero.
  
  NOTA 86. Amici McNealy y Stuphin (Ex Ejecutivos de Sun Microsystems) mencionan “...en otros ambientes de programación se puede ver que los creadores de otras plataformas de desarrollo proveen las mismas funciones con distintas expresiones creativas. Por ejemplo, en Java un desarrollador para establecer la zona horaria (setting the time zone) llamaría al método de Java setTime-Zone dentro de la clase DateFormat del paquete de java.text. Microsoft provee una funcionalidad similar con una estructura y selección totalmente distinta para el esquema de nombres. En la plataforma de desarrollo para teléfonos Windows, Microsoft almacena los programas de zonas horarias dentro de la clase TimeZoneInfo en su Sistema de espacios de nombres o namespace (que sería la versión de “paquete” para Microsoft)”.
  
  NOTA 87. Sega Enterprises v. Accolade, Inc, 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir.1992)

  NOTA 88. Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. V. Connectix, Corp., 203 F.3d 596 (9th Cir.2000)

  NOTA 89. (Dun & Bradstreet Software Servs v. Grace Consulting, Inc., 307 F.3d 197, 215 (3d Cir. 2002).

  NOTA 90. (Dun & Bradstreet Software Servs v. Grace Consulting, Inc., 307 F.3d 197, 215 (3d Cir. 2002).
