REFERENCIAS CAPITULO IV

NOTA 33
Véase en la contestación de demanda de Google, en la sección “Factual Background” Punto C. Subpunto 20. Google afirma: “La plataforma Android ha sido un éxito en la industria de telefonía móvil. A pesar de que Android ha llegado después que otros al mercado de smartphones o teléfonos inteligentes, habiéndose hecho disponible el primero de ellos en el año 2008, hoy en día (octubre de 2012) existen aproximadamente 90 diferentes dispositivos basados en Android fabricados por 20 fabricantes distintos y disponibles en decenas de países. Aproximadamente unos 200.000 teléfonos basados en Android son activados diariamente en más de 50 operadores inalámbricos diferentes. El Mercado de Android (“Android Market”) la tienda donde los desarrolladores pueden vender aplicaciones (“apps”) que ellos mismos crean basados en dispositivos Android, posee más de 80.000 apps disponibles para ser descargadas.

NOTA 34
October 4, 2010-Filing 32- GOOGLE INC.'S ANSWER to Complaint with Jury Demand, COUNTERCLAIM against Oracle America, Inc. by Google Inc. (Zimmer, Donald) (Filed on 10/4/2010) y November 10, 2010 Filing 51 Google Inc.'s ANSWER to Amended Complaint for Patent and Copyright Infringement, Amended COUNTERCLAIM against Oracle America, Inc. by Google Inc. (Zimmer, Donald) (Filed on 11/10/2010)

NOTA 35
http://www.openhandsetalliance.com/oha_members.html entre sus miembros se encuentran las siguientes empresas: Accenture, WIPRO, Wind River (an Intel Company), Google, eBay, ARM, Intel Corporation, Texas Instruments Inc., Telefónica, ST-Ericsson, Qualcomm, NVIDIA Corporation, Marvel Semiconductor Inc., Broadcom Corporation, ACER Inc., Alcatel Mobile Phones, DELL, Fujitsu, Garmin International Inc., HTC Corporation, HUAWEI Technologies, Kyocera, Lenovo Mobile Communication Technology Ltd, LG Electronics Inc., Motorola Inc., NEC Corporation, Samsung Electronics, SHARP Corporation, SONY ERICSSON, Toshiba Corporation, ZTE Corporation, etc.

NOTA 36
http://source.android.com/ y http://developer.android.com/

NOTA 37
Google hace referencia a las palabras del CEO de Sun Microsystems, Jonathan Schwartz felicitando a Android de esta manera: “Needless to say, Google and the Open Handset Alliance just strapped another set of rockets to the community´s momentum-and the vision defining opportunity across out (and other) planets”

NOTA 38

NOTA 39
Véase el siguiente link en donde Google explica cuáles son las razones por las cuales decidió utilizar la Licencia Apache -y no la Licencia GNU LGPL-. Se menciona: Why Apache Software License? For userspace (non-kernel) software, we prefer Apache 2.0 (and similar licenses such as BSD and MIT) over other licenses such as the Lesser General Public License (LGPL). Here's why. Android is about freedom and choice. The purpose of Android is to promote openness in the mobile world, and we can't predict or dictate all the uses for our software. So, while we encourage everyone to make open and modifiable devices, we don't think it's our place to force them to do so. Using LGPL libraries could be restrictive. Here are some of our specific concerns: In simplified terms, LGPL requires shipping of source to the application; a written offer for source; or linking the LGPL-ed library dynamically and allowing users to manually upgrade or replace the library. Android software is typically shipped as a static system image, so complying with these requirements restricts device manufacturer designs. For instance, it's difficult for a user to replace a library on read-only flash storage. LGPL requires the allowance of customer modification and reverse engineering for debugging those modifications. Most device makers don't want to be bound by these terms. Historically, LGPL libraries have been the source of many compliance problems for downstream device makers and application developers. Educating engineers on these issues is difficult and time-consuming. It's critical to Android's success that device makers can easily comply with the licenses. The issues discussed above are our reasons for preferring Apache 2.0 for our code. They aren't criticisms of LGPL or other licenses. We appreciate all free and open-source licenses, and respect others' license preferences. We've simply decided that Apache 2.0 is right for our goals”

NOTA 40
https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/COPYING y https://spdx.org/licenses/GPL-2.0-only.html

NOTA 41
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_Harmony Apache Harmony is a retired open source, free Java implementation, developed by the Apache Software Foundation. It was announced in early May 2005 and on October 25, 2006, the Board of Directors voted to make Apache Harmony a top-level project. The Harmony project achieved (as of February 2011) 99% completeness for J2SE 5.0, and 97% for Java SE 6. The Android operating system has historically been a major user of Harmony, although since Android Nougat it increasingly relies on OpenJDK libraries.

NOTA 42
Véase información de la Fundación de Software Apache en

NOTA 43
Menciona Google, que “Android includes certain APIs in order to be interoperable with the Java Platform, i.e., so that programs written in the Java programming language using common programming techniques will run properly on Android devices. However, the Android source code – e.g., the code for the Dalvik virtual machine, etc. – does not use Oracle’s Java source code”. Véase March 31, 2011 Filing 102 CLAIM CONSTRUCTION STATEMENT Google's Responsive Claim Construction Brief filed by Google Inc. (Baber, Bruce) (Filed on 3/31/2011)

NOTA 44
En el punto E, subpunto 23 de su contestación de demanda Google agrega que la plataforma Android y ninguno de sus componentes infringe ninguna de las patentes mencionados por Oracle, a saber: U.S. Reissue Patent No. RE38,104 (“the ‘104 reissue patent”), and U.S. Patent Nos. 5,966,702 (“the ‘702 patent”), 6,061,520 (“the ‘520 patent”), 6,125,447 (“the ‘447 patent”), 6,192,476 (“the ‘476 patent”), 6,910,205 (“the ‘205 patent”), and 7,426,720 (“the ‘720 patent”).

NOTA 45
El 13 de noviembre del año 2006 Sun Microsystems anunció que en el primer trimestre del año 2007 la plataforma Java SE sería software de código abierto bajo la licencia GPL v2. Véase el anuncio de Rich Green Vice Presidente Ejecutivo de Software de Sun Microsystems en

NOTA 46
Oracle reconoció que Sun Microsystems había hecho disponible parte del código fuente de la Plataforma Java Edición Estándar y también de otras Ediciones durante el año 2006 y 2007 sujeto a los términos y condiciones de la Licencia Pública General, Versión 2 (General Public License, version 2 o “GPLv2”). Véase October 28, 2010- Filing 41 ANSWER TO COUNTERCLAIM #32 Answer to Complaint, Counterclaim Oracle America, Inc.'s Reply to Defendant Google Inc.'s Answer to Complaint for Patent and Copyright Infringement and Counterclaims by Oracle America, Inc. (Ballinger, Richard) (Filed on 10/28/2010) https://cases.justia.com/federal/district-courts/california/candce/3:2010cv03561/231846/41/0.pdf?ts=1288527677 y November 29, 2010 Filing 60 ANSWER TO COUNTERCLAIM #51 Answer to Amended Complaint, Counterclaim by Oracle America, Inc.. (Peters, Marc) (Filed on 11/29/2010) en https://cases.justia.com/federal/district-courts/california/candce/3:2010cv03561/231846/60/0.pdf?ts=1291824224

NOTA 47
Véase en el sitio oficial de OpenJDK que se expresa por Oracle lo siguiente: "CLASSPATH" EXCEPTION TO THE GPL Certain source files distributed by Oracle America and/or its affiliates are subject to the following clarification and special exception to the GPL, but only where Oracle has expressly included in the particular source file's header the words "Oracle designates this particular file as subject to the "Classpath" exception as provided by Oracle in the LICENSE file that accompanied this code." Linking this library statically or dynamically with other modules is making a combined work based on this library. Thus, the terms and conditions of the GNU General Public License cover the whole combination. As a special exception, the copyright holders of this library give you permission to link this library with independent modules to produce an executable, regardless of the license terms of these independent modules, and to copy and distribute the resulting executable under terms of your choice, provided that you also meet, for each linked independent module, the terms and conditions of the license of that module. An independent module is a module which is not derived from or based on this library. If you modify this library, you may extend this exception to your version of the library, but you are not obligated to do so. If you do not wish to do so, delete this exception statement from your version. “ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ABOUT LICENSING Certain files distributed by Oracle America, Inc. and/or its affiliates are subject to the following clarification and special exception to the GPLv2, based on the GNU Project exception for its Classpath libraries, known as the GNU Classpath Exception. Note that Oracle includes multiple, independent programs in this software package. Some of those programs are provided under licenses deemed incompatible with the GPLv2 by the Free Software Foundation and others. For example, the package includes programs licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 and may include FreeType. Such programs are licensed to you under their original licenses. Oracle facilitates your further distribution of this package by adding the Classpath Exception to the necessary parts of its GPLv2 code, which permits you to use that code in combination with other independent modules not licensed under the GPLv2. However, note that this would not permit you to commingle code under an incompatible license with Oracle's GPLv2 licensed code by, for example, cutting and pasting such code into a file also containing Oracle's GPLv2 licensed code and then distributing the result. Additionally, if you were to remove the Classpath Exception from any of the files to which it applies and distribute the result, you would likely be required to license some or all of the other code in that distribution under the GPLv2 as well, and since the GPLv2 is incompatible with the license terms of some items included in the distribution by Oracle, removing the Classpath Exception could therefore effectively compromise your ability to further distribute the package. Failing to distribute notices associated with some files may also create unexpected legal consequences. Proceed with caution and we recommend that you obtain the advice of a lawyer skilled in open-source matters before removing the Classpath Exception or making modifications to this package which may subsequently be redistributed and/or involve the use of third-party software”.

NOTA 48
Los links mencionados por Google en su demanda que son: y , hoy redirigen al siguiente link de Oracle https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/

NOTA 49
Al respecto del proyecto Apache Harmony véase en el sitio oficial de la Fundación de Software Apache. https://apache.org/jcp/sunopenletterfaq.html What is the Apache Harmony project? Apache Harmony is a project of the Apache Software Foundation focused on creating an independent, compatible implementation of Java SE. That means we're writing the whole implementation from scratch, or incorporating software from other open- source projects. Why was Harmony created? Harmony was created for many reasons. The fundamental reason is the same as other projects in the open source/free software space working Java (such as GNU Classpath, Kaffe, GCJ, etc) - we wanted to do an implementation of a complete, compatible Java SE runtime environment, including virtual machine, class library and tools under a FLOSS license. Was it always possible to create and distribute implementations of JSRs under free and open-source licenses? No, but the ASF was instrumental in making this possible. In 2002, the Apache Software Foundation, working with other members of the Java community, led the effort to change the JCP governance document - the "Java Specification Participation Agreement" or JSPA. These changes finally made it possible to create independent implementations of Java specification under free and open-source licenses. Before these changes, it was impossible to do so”. Why doesn't Apache simply ignore this and ships Harmony without passing the JCK? We can ship Harmony without passing the JCK - it's our source code to do with what we wish - and we will with milestone releases as we progress towards completion. However, we could never claim to be Java compatible, which is something very important to Java users, and is the stated goal of the project. Also, users wouldn't be assured that they had all necessary IP rights from the spec's contributors. Compatibility is important to us as is not putting users in IP jeopardy, as it has been for every JSR the ASF has ever implemented. We have no interest in forking the technology.

NOTA 50
Véase en el sitio web oficial de la Fundación de Software Apache https://apache.org/jcp/sunopenletterfaq.html What is a "field of use" restriction? A "field of use" restriction is a restriction that limits how a user can use a given piece of software, either directly or indirectly. To give a concrete example from the Sun/Apache dispute, if Apache accepted Sun's terms, then users of a standard, tested build of Apache Harmony for Linux on a standard general purpose x86-based computer (for example, a Dell desktop) would be prevented from freely using that software and that hardware in any application where the computer was placed in an enclosed cabinet, like an information kiosk at a shopping mall, or an X-ray machine at an airport.

NOTA 51
Véase en https://www.apache.org/jcp/sunopenletter.html “On April 10, 2007, the Apache Software Foundation sent the following letter to Sun Microsystems regarding our inability to acquire an acceptable license for the Java SE 5 technology compatibility kit, a test kit needed by the Apache Harmony project to demonstrate compatibility with the Java SE 5 specification, as required by the Sun specification license for Java SE 5. …” Since August 2006, the ASF has been attempting to secure an acceptable license from Sun for the test kit for Java SE. This test kit, called the "Java Compatibility Kit" or "JCK", is needed by the Apache Harmony project to demonstrate its compatibility with the Java SE specification, as required by Sun's specification license. The JCK license Sun is offering imposes IP rights restrictions through limits on the "field of use" available to users of our software. La Fundación Apache manifestó que las restricciones impuestas por Sun Microsystems eran violatorias del Contrato de Participación en las Especificaciones de Java (Sección 5) (“Java Specification Participation Agreement”) que es el acuerdo que establece las reglas del Proceso de la Comunidad Java (Java Community Process o JCP) del cual el mismo Sun Microsystems estaba obligado a cumplir teniendo en cuenta que era parte firmante del mismo. Véaselo en

NOTA 52
“We expect you to offer an acceptable, JSPA-compliant license to us within 30 days, or provide a public explanation of why you cannot do so”.

NOTA 53
Básicamente lo que quería la Fundación Apache era que Sun Microsystems removiera las “restricciones de uso” (FOU), y a su vez que no estuviera condicionada solamente esa remoción a la Licencia Apache V.2.0 sino a cualquier licencia de software libre y de código abierto (FOSS), es decir independientemente de la Licencia FOSS, la “FOU” debía ser removida, y no sólo si la implementación independiente (Apache Harmony) de la Fundación Apache se licenciaba bajo los términos de la Licencia Apache V. 2.0. La Fundación Apache promulga las especificaciones abiertas (“Open Specifications”) por ende su deseo era que se pudieran realizar implementaciones abiertas bajo licencias de código abierto (FOSS). Un punto importante que destaca la Fundación Apache es que cualquier obra derivada de la implementación de Apache Harmony debía pasar su propio TCK, y lo dice así “Note that it's still true that if someone makes a derivative work of Apache Harmony, they are still obligated to secure their own JCK license and test their derivative if they wish to call their work compatible”

NOTA 54
Oracle reconoció que en agosto de 2006 la Fundación de Software Apache requirió un TCK (el test de compatibilidad con la plataforma Java) para verificar que la implementación independiente denominada Apache Harmony realizada por la Fundación de Software Apache era compatible con Java, y también reconoció Oracle, que Sun Microsystems incluyó la restricción de uso (FOU) en la Licencia TCK. Oracle también reconoció que la Fundación Apache escribió en el mes de abril de 2007 una carta abierta requiriendo una licencia TCK (o de especificación) sin la restricción de uso (FOU), y que Sun Microsystems rechazó el retirar la restricción de uso. Véase el documento “November 29, 2010 Filing 60 ANSWER TO COUNTERCLAIM #51 Answer to Amended Complaint, Counterclaim by Oracle America, Inc. (Peters, Marc) (Filed on 11/29/2010) en

NOTA 55
The Java Community Process (JCP): Program is the process by which the international Java community standardizes and ratifies the specifications for Java technologies. The JCP ensures high-quality specifications are developed using an inclusive, consensus-based approach. Specifications ratified by the JCP must be accompanied by a Reference Implementation (to prove the Specification can be implemented) and a Technology Compatibility Kit (a suite of tests, tools, and documentation that is used to test implementations for compliance with the Specification) Conforme surge de a Mayo de 2021 el Comité Ejecutivo del JCP está conformado por: Alibaba, ARM, Bellsoft, Marcus Biel, BNY Mellon, Eclipse Foundation, Ken Fogel, Fujitsu Limited, JetBrains, IBM, Intel, London Java Community, MicroDoc, Oracle, SAP SE, SouJava, Tomitribe y Twitter.

NOTA 56
Oracle reconoció en las reuniones del Comité Ejecutivo de los días 4 y 5 de Diciembre de 2007 (http://jcp.org/aboutJava/communityprocess/summaries/2007/December07-summary.html) del Java Community Process había propuesto la Resolución 1 que decía lo siguiente: “It is the sense of the Executive Committee that the JCP become an open independent vendor-neutral Standards Organization where all members participate on a level playing field with the following characteristics: 1) members fund development and management expenses, 2) a legal entity with by-laws, governing body, membership, etc., 3) a new, simplified IPR Policy that permits the broadest number of implementations, 4) stringent compatibility requirements, 5) dedicated to promoting the Java programming model. Furthermore, the EC shall put a plan in place to make such transition as soon as practical with minimal disruption to the Java Community.” Oracle también reconoció que dicha resolución fue respaldada por Bea Systems. Para ello, véase November 29, 2010 Filing 60 ANSWER TO COUNTERCLAIM #51 Answer to Amended Complaint, Counterclaim by Oracle America, Inc. (Peters, Marc) (Filed on 11/29/2010) en https://cases.justia.com/federal/district-courts/california/candce/3:2010cv03561/231846/60/0.pdf?ts=1291824224

NOTA 57
Oracle reconoció que en la reunión del mes de Abril del 2009 del Comité Ejecutivo del Java Community Process se dijo lo siguiente, y que Oracle votó afirmativamente diciendo “sí”: “Following the February 2009 EC meeting, the following motion for electronic (email) voting was proposed by Apache Software Foundation and seconded by Intel Corp. “TCK licenses must not be used to discriminate against or restrict compatible implementations of Java specifications by including field of use restrictions on the tested implementations or otherwise. Licenses containing such limitations do not meet the requirements of the JSPA, the agreement under which the JCP operates, and violate the expectations of the Java community that JCP specs can be openly implemented.” Para ello véase November 29, 2010 Filing 60 ANSWER TO COUNTERCLAIM #51 Answer to Amended Complaint, Counterclaim by Oracle America, Inc. (Peters, Marc) (Filed on 11/29/2010) en https://cases.justia.com/federal/district-courts/california/candce/3:2010cv03561/231846/60/0.pdf?ts=1291824224

NOTA 58
Esta decisión del Juez William Alsup del mes de abril del año 2016 (en esta época ya se estaba discutiendo la cuestión del uso justo o “Fair Use”) consideró que Google tenía derecho a contar de donde había obtenido el software bajo disputa, y que, por lo tanto, la historia relacionada a la implementación Harmony de la Fundación Apache era relevante, y se dijo así: THE APACHE STORY IS RELEVANT TO WILLFULLNESS AND FAIR USE. Given that Oracle is accusing Google of willful copyright infringement, Google is entitled to present to the jury the story of how it acquired the software code in question, including its downloading of the 37 APIs in question from Apache’s website. At a minimum, therefore, the Apache story is relevant to Google’s defense against Oracle’s charge of willfulness. April 28, 2016. Opinion or Order Filing 1748 ORDER IN LIMINE RE ORACLE'S MOTION IN LIMINE NO. 2 TO EXCLUDE EVIDENCE OF APACHE HARMONY AND GNU CLASSPATH by Judge William Alsup [denying #1552 Motion in Limine]. The Court reserves its ruling on evidence regarding GNU Classpath for the reasons stated in this order. (whasec, COURT STAFF) (Filed on 4/28/2016). https://www.plainsite.org/dockets/download.html?id=235606491&z=2d4c55f9

NOTA 59
En relación a la “restricción de uso” (FOU) se dijo “Google proffers that at the time in question, it was an accepted practice that the header lines in the APIs could be copied freely without a license so long as the copier used its own implementing code and, in the case of Java, did not call itself Java. If this proves true, this would certainly mitigate Oracle’s charge of bad faith and willful acquisition and use and explain why Google might have believed that it needed no license whatsoever from Sun to use the Apache Harmony APIs. So, at least to some extent, the Apache story bears upon whether or not there was a custom and practice in favor of the kind of use made by Google. One caveat: it is problematic (from Google’s point of view) that Google knew of Sun’s field-of-use restriction, so it is not entirely clear how the Apache story will establish custom and practice within the meaning of Wall Data. Accordingly, the Court will listen carefully to the evidence as it is presented and at some point may restrict further evidence regarding custom under Rule 403, but the Court is not yet prepared to say that balance favors exclusion altogether. April 28, 2016. Opinion or Order Filing 1748 ORDER IN LIMINE RE ORACLE'S MOTION IN LIMINE NO. 2 TO EXCLUDE EVIDENCE OF APACHE HARMONY AND GNU CLASSPATH by Judge William Alsup [denying #1552 Motion in Limine]. The Court reserves its ruling on evidence regarding GNU ClassPath for the reasons stated in this order. (whasec, COURT STAFF) (Filed on 4/28/2016) https://www.plainsite.org/dockets/download.html?id=235606491&z=2d4c55f9

NOTA 60
Véase resolución del Juez William Alsup. April 28, 2016. Opinion or Order Filing 1748 ORDER IN LIMINE RE ORACLE'S MOTION IN LIMINE NO. 2 TO EXCLUDE EVIDENCE OF APACHE HARMONY AND GNU CLASSPATH by Judge William Alsup [denying #1552 Motion in Limine]. The Court reserves its ruling on evidence regarding GNU Classpath for the reasons stated in this order. (whasec, COURT STAFF) (Filed on 4/28/2016) https://www.plainsite.org/dockets/download.html?id=235606491&z=2d4c55f9

NOTA 61
Nuevamente, What is the Apache Harmony project? Apache Harmony is a project of the Apache Software Foundation focused on creating an independent, compatible implementation of Java SE. That means we’re writing the whole implementation from scratch, or incorporating software from other open-source projects. https://apache.org/jcp/sunopenletterfaq.html

NOTA 62
La compatibilidad con Java fue el objetivo primario de la Fundación Apache- Véase cuando se dice: Why was Harmony created? Harmony was created for many reasons. The fundamental reason is the same as other projects in the open source / free software space working Java (such as GNU Classpath, Kaffe, GCJ, etc.) we wanted to do an implementation of a complete, compatible Java SE runtime environment, including virtual machine, class library and tools under a FLOSS license. https://apache.org/jcp/sunopenletterfaq.html

NOTA 63
https://www.gnu.org/software/classpath/

NOTA 64
April 28, 2016. Opinion or Order Filing 1748 ORDER IN LIMINE RE ORACLE'S MOTION IN LIMINE NO. 2 TO EXCLUDE EVIDENCE OF APACHE HARMONY AND GNU CLASSPATH by Judge William Alsup [denying #1552 Motion in Limine]. The Court reserves its ruling on evidence regarding GNU ClassPath for the reasons stated in this order. (Filed on 4/28/2016) https://www.plainsite.org/dockets/download.html?id=235606491&z=2d4c55f9

NOTA 65
El testimonio de Dan Bornstein, un programador experto de Android, propuesto por Google. Se menciona que Bornestein, dijo así: “Bornstein went on to describe how Android was built, using a combination of open-source software off the Internet and code written at Google. Apache Harmony was a major source for the "core libraries" that Android needed. His team used some Java APIs and built many Android APIs of their own. Annette Hurst, abogada de Oracle preguntó a Bornestein “You instructed Noser [a Google contractor] that they absolutely could not use Classpath code, because it was covered by an incompatible license," said Hurst, referring to the GPL license used by GNU Classpath. "Isn't that true?" "We did not want to use code, as much as possible, that used that license," Bornstein agreed. Hurst asked about more examples of code that Bornstein wanted to avoid because of licensing issues. It was a return to a theme Oracle lawyers have brought up in other cross-examinations: the idea that Google was blowing off licensing rules. "And you didn’t use the JDK source code because the license was incompatible with Android?" asked Hurst. "It was more about the timing," said Bornstein. "The [Apache] Harmony train had left the station. We were well on our way to getting it done. Technically, we could have dropped it, but I don't think there would have been a point to it." https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2016/05/top-programmer-describes-androids-nuts-and-bolts-in-oracle-v-google/

NOTA 66
Véase “ClassPath is distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License with the following clarification and special exception: “Linking this library statically or dynamically with other modules is making a combined work based on this library. Thus, the terms and conditions of the GNU General Public License cover the whole combination. As a special exception, the copyright holders of this library give you permission to link this library with independent modules to produce an executable, regardless of the license terms of these independent modules, and to copy and distribute the resulting executable under terms of your choice, provided that you also meet, for each linked independent module, the terms and conditions of the license of that module. An independent module is a module which is not derived from or based on this library. If you modify this library, you may extend this exception to your version of the library, but you are not obligated to do so. If you do not wish to do so, delete this exception statement from your version”. https://www.gnu.org/software/classpath/license.html

NOTA 67
Véase: Order denying Rule 50 Motions, June 8, 2016. En relación a una instrucción solicitada por Google relativa a lo que se debía entenderse por costumbre (o en inglés “custom”) conforme el caso Wall Data Inc. V. Los Angeles County Sheriff´s Dept (9th Cir. 2006) relacionado al uso justo. Y en su parte relevante en relación a la inexistencia de licencia se cita el párrafo 27 y se dice “Similarly, you have heard evidence about various license from Apache Foundation, Apache Harmony involving Java, and the General Public License. These are relevant in some ways, but Google concedes it had no license from Sun or Oracle, and it is important to remember that Google makes no claim that its use was pursuant to a license from Sun or Oracle, directly or indirectly. Instead, Google claims that its use was a fair use and therefore required no license at all”

NOTA 68
Véase March 31, 2011 Filing 102 CLAIM CONSTRUCTION STATEMENT Google's Responsive Claim Construction Brief filed by Google Inc. (Baber, Bruce) (Filed on 3/31/2011)
